Τριστάτας κραταιούς, 6
ὁ τεχθεὶς ἐκ Παρθένου, 7
ἀπαθείας ἐν βυθῷ, 7
ψυχῆς τὸ τριμερές, 6
καταπόντισον δέομαι, 8
ὅπως σοι ὡς ἐν τυμπάνῳ 8
τῇ νεκρώσει τοῦ σώματος, 8
ἐπινίκιον ᾄσω μελῴδημα. 11


I pray You to submerge 
in the sea of dispassion 
the three powers of my soul, 
like those powerful hosts. 
And then using the deadening 
of my body for a timbrel, 
I may sing a triumphal hymn 
unto You who born of the Virgin pure.



With my body then mortified, 
like a timbrel, 

mor

I will sing You a victory 
song using as if a timbrel 
by 

as if it were a timbrel 
to You born of a virgin Maid 

with the timbrel of my mortified 
body, I will sing




so that I may sing You a song of victory 
with the mortification of my body for the timbrel


so that 
so that with my body mortified as a timbrel




JMB
O Lord, in an abyss * of dispassion, I beg you, * drown the third part of my soul, * the captains third in rank, * mighty brutes of desire and greed, * that, by putting down the body, * to you, born of a Virgin Maid, * I may sing, as on timbrel, of victory.



Jesus
I pray You submerge
the three aspects or powers of my soul 


Pharaoh’s chariots and his host he cast into the sea;
    and his picked officers are sunk in the Red Sea.

τριστάτης = one who stands third, third in rank 
one who comes next to the sovereign and his queen
captain 

ψηχῆς τὸ τριμερές = the tripartite soul

τριστάτας κραταιους / ψυχῆς τὸ τριμερές 
powerful captains / the three aspects or powers of my soul 

κραταιούς 
psa135.v18.text = "Καὶ ἀποκτείναντι βασιλεῖς κραταιούς, ὅτι εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τὸ ἔλεος αὐτοῦ,"
SAAS = "And killed mighty kings, for His mercy endures forever."
RSV = "And slew famous kings, for his steadfast love endures for ever;"

psa53.v5.text = "Ὅτι ἀλλότριοι ἐπανέστησαν ἐπʼ ἐμὲ καὶ κραταιοὶ ἐζήτησαν τὴν ψυχήν μου 
SAAS = "For strangers rise up against me, and the powerful seek after my soul;
RSV = "For insolent men have risen against me, ruthless men seek my life;

Ex 15.5
πόντῳ ἐκάλυψεν αὐτούς· κατέδυσαν εἰς βυθὸν ὡσεὶ λίθος
SAAS = The sea covered them; they sank to the bottom like a stone.
RSV = The floods cover them; they went down into the depths like a stone.



psa68.v16.text = "Μή με καταποντισάτω καταιγὶς ὕδατος, μηδὲ καταπιέτω με βυθός, μηδὲ συσχέτω ἐπʼ ἐμὲ φρέαρ τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ."
psa68.v16.text = "Let not a storm of water drown me; neither let the deep swallow me up, nor the well enclose its mouth upon me."
