oc.m3.d2.ocMA.Kathisma33
Τὰ ἐπουράνια, φόβῳ ἠγάλλοντο, 
καὶ τὰ ἐπίγεια, πόθῳ ηὐφραίνοντο, 
ὅτε ἡ ἄχραντος φωνή, ἐπῆλθέ σοι Θεοτόκε· 
μία γὰρ πανήγυρις, ἀμφοτέροις ἐπέλαμψε, 
ὅτε τὸν πρωτόπλαστον, ὁ Δεσπότης ἐῤῥύσατο. 
Διὸ σὺν τῷ Ἀγγέλῳ βοῶμέν σοι· Χαῖρε ἡ Κεχαριτωμένη."

goadedes
All beings heavenly rejoiced with fear and awe, 
and even earth itself was very glad indeed, 
O Theotokos, when that pure salutation was spoken to you. 
Then your Son and Master saved from destruction the first-formed man, 
and  those on high and here below celebrated in unison. 
And therefore with the Angel we say to you: Rejoice, O Maiden full of grace!


Then your Son and Master saved from destruction the first-formed man, 
and those on high and here below celebrated in unison.

pe.d092 dedes
All beings heavenly with longing leapt for joy, * while everything on earth with trembling stood in awe, * O Theotokos, when that pure salutation was spoken to you. 
Then your Son and Master saved from destruction the first-formed man, 
and  those on high and here below celebrated in unison. 
And therefore with the Angel we say to you: Rejoice, O pure and Virgin Mother.


peMA.Kathisma23.text = "Τὰ ἐπουράνια, πόθῳ ἠγάλλοντο, καὶ τὰ ἐπίγεια, τρόμῳ ἐξίσταντο, ὅτε ἡ ἄχραντος φωνή, ἐπῆλθέ σοι Θεοτόκε· μία γὰρ πανήγυρις, ἀμφοτέροις ἐπέλαμψεν, ὅτι τὸν Πρωτόπλαστον, ἐκ θανάτου ἐῤῥύσατο· διὸ σὺν τῷ Ἀγγέλῳ βοῶμέν σοι· Χαῖρε ἁγνὴ Παρθενομῆτορ.

od.m3.d3.ocMA.Kathisma31
Ἐν τῇ σκέπῃ σου, προσπεφευγότες, 
πίστει κράζομεν, ψυχῆς ἐκ βάθους, 
θεομακάριστε Προφῆτα καὶ Πρόδρομε, 
τῶν πειρασμῶν καὶ κινδύνων τὸν τάραχον, 
καὶ νοσημάτων τὸν σάλον κατεύνασον, 
καὶ ματαίωσον ἐχθρῶν δυσμενῶν βουλεύματα, 
αἰτούμενος ἡμῖν τὸ μέγα ἔλεος.



We rely on you and your protection, 
and we soulfully with faith implore you, 
O St. John, Prophet, Forerunner, blest by God, 
to quell the storm of diseases afflicting us, 
the woes and dangers that shake us like turbulence. 
Frustrate every plot that enemies have prepared for us, 
and ask the Lord to grant us the great mercy.



oc.m3.d4.ocVE.Stichera1
Ἡ κτίσις ἠλλοιώθη Λόγε τῇ σταυρώσει σου, 
ὁ ἥλιος ἀκτῖνας, συνέστειλε τῷ φόβῳ, 
καὶ ναοῦ τὸ καταπέτασμα ἐσχίσθη, 
καὶ πᾶς πιστὸς σέσωσται· 
ὅθεν δοξάζομεν, 
σοῦ τὸν ἄμετρον πλοῦτον.

Creation was affected, O Word, when You were crucified. 
The sun concealed its rays out of fear, and the earth shook, 
and the curtain of the Temple was torn in two, 
and all believers were saved. 
And now we glorify 
Your immense wealth of mercy.

oc.m3.d4.ocMA.Kathisma31
Σταυρὸν ὑπέμεινας, ἀτίμως Δέσποτα, 
ὁ ὑπερέκεινα, πάσης τῆς κτίσεως, 
ὅπως τιμήσῃς με τὸν πρίν, δεινῶς ἀτιμασθέντα, 
λόγχῃ τὴν πλευράν σου δέ, 
ἐκεντήθης μακρόθυμε, 
θέλων ἐκλυτρώσασθαι, 
τῆς φθορᾶς με τὸ πλάσμα σου. 
Ὑμνῶ σου τὴν πολλὴν εὐσπλαγχνίαν, 
καὶ τὴν ἀγαθότητα φιλάνθρωπε.

You who who transcend the whole created universe, 
wishing to honor me who long ago sustained 
the grave dishonor, have endured dishonorable death on the cross. 
And You let your side be pierced 
with a spear, for you wished to free 
from utter destruction me, 
whom You fashioned, O forbearing Lord. 
I glorify Your goodness, O Savior, 
and Your great compassion, O benevolent God.

oc.m3.d4.ocMA.Kathisma33
Ἀναρτηθέντα σε, ὡς ἐθεάσατο, 
ἐν ξύλῳ Δέσποτα, ἡ ἀπειρόγαμος, 
καὶ Παναμώμητος ἁγνή, Παρθένος τε καὶ Μήτηρ σου. 
Οἴμοι! ἀνεβόα σοι· ὦ Υἱέ μου γλυκύτατε, 
πῶς σε ἀνομώτατος, δῆμος ξύλῳ κατέκρινε, 
τὸν πάντων ποιητὴν καὶ Δεσπότην! 
Ὑμνῶ σου τὴν ἄκραν ἀγαθότητα."

When Your immaculate and irreproachable 
and ever-virgin pure, all-holy Mother watched 
as You were crucified, O Lord, she saw You on the cross and wept. 
Tearfully she cried aloud, "Woe is me! O my sweetest Son! 
How could this unlawful crowd condemn You to be crucified, 
for You are Lord of all and Creator! 
I glorify Your goodness that has no end."


oc.m3.d4.ocMA.Aposticha1
Φθόνῳ τρυφῆς ἐκβέβλημαι, πτῶμα πεσὼν χαλεπόν, ἀλλʼ οὐ παρεῖδες Δέσποτα, ἀναλαβὼν διʼ ἐμὲ τὸ κατʼ ἐμέ, σταυροῦσαι, καὶ σῴζεις με, εἰς δόξαν εἰσάγεις με· Λυτρωτά μου, δόξα σοι."

I was cast out of Eden because of envy. It was a terrible fall. But You, O Master, did not overlook me. But You assumed my nature for me, and You were crucified. And You save me and bring me into glory. O my Redeemer, glory to You!

oc.m3.d4.ocMA.Aposticha3
Ὡς φωστῆρες ἐν κόσμῳ λάμπετε, καὶ μετὰ θάνατον ἅγιοι Μάρτυρες, τὸν ἀγῶνα τὸν καλὸν ἀγωνισάμενοι· διὸ ἔχοντες παῤῥησίαν, Χριστὸν ἱκετεύσατε, ἐλεηθῆναι τὰς ψυχὰς ἡμῶν."

O holy Martyrs, even after death, you shine on the world like luminaries, for you fought the good fight. 
Now that you have confidence when praying to Christ, entreat Him to have mercy on our souls.

oc.m3.d4.ocMA.AposTheotokion
Ὁρῶσά σε κρεμάμενον, ἐν ξύλῳ ἡ Πανάμωμος, 
Χριστέ μου ὑπεράγαθε, ὀδυρομένη ἐβόα μητρικῶς· 
Υἱέ μου παμφίλτατε, 
πῶς δῆμος ὁ ἄνομος, ξύλῳ σε κατέκρινε;"

O Christ, my most benevolent Savior, 
when Your irreproachable Mother 
saw You hanging on the cross, 
she lamented and cried aloud, 
"O my beloved Son, 
how could this unlawful crowd condemn You to be crucified!" 
_________________________________________________________________

oc.m3.d5.ocMA.Kathisma31
Σὲ τὸν κήρυκα, τῆς ἀληθείας, 
καὶ ὑπέρλαμπρον, φωστῆρα κόσμου, 
εὐφημοῦντες ἀνυμνοῦμεν Νικόλαε, 
καὶ ἐκβοῶμεν ἐν πίστει δεόμενοι. 
Ὡς τοὺς ἀθώους θανάτου ἐξήρπασας, 
οὕτως Ἅγιε, κινδύνων ἡμᾶς καὶ θλίψεων, 
καὶ πάσης ἐξελοῦ δεινῆς κακώσεως.

We extol you as a mighty preacher 
of the truth of God, and as a brilliant 
luminary in the world, and we sing your praise, 
as we entreat you with faith and we pray to you: 
As you once rescued those innocent men from death, 
likewise rescue us from danger, O father Nicholas, 
and save us from disasters and accidents.

oc.m3.d5.ocMA.Kathisma33
Θρόνος πάγχρυσος, τοῦ Βασιλέως, 
καὶ Παράδεισος, διηνθισμένος, 
ἀνεδείχθης Θεοτόκε Πανάχραντε· 
τὸν γὰρ Θεὸν ἐν γαστρί σου βαστάσασα, 
εὐωδιάζεις ἡμᾶς θείαις χάρισιν· 
ὅθεν ἅπαντες, Θεοῦ ἀληθῶς Μητέρα σε, 
κηρύττομεν ἀεὶ καὶ μεγαλύνομεν.

We declare that you are truly Mother 
of our God and we all magnify you, 
who carried God in your womb and gave birth to Him. 
O all-immaculate Virgin, and thus you are 
the golden throne of the King of the universe 
metaphorically, and likewise a blooming Paradise, 
for you emit like fragrance the gifts of grace.

oc.m3.d5.ocMA.Aposticha3
Αἱ δυνάμεις τῶν Ἁγίων Ἀγγέλων, ἐθαύμασαν τῶν Μαρτύρων τοὺς ἄθλους, 
ὅτι σῶμα θνητὸν περικείμενοι, βασάνων κατεφρόνησαν, 
μιμηταὶ γενόμενοι, τοῦ Πάθους τοῦ Σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, 
καὶ πρεσβεύουσιν ὑπὲρ τῶν ψυχῶν ὑμῶν.

The hosts of holy Angels were amazed by the contests of the Martyrs. 
For even in their mortal bodies, they disregarded the tortures, 
they imitated the Passion of our Savior, 
and now they intercede on behalf of our souls.

___________________________________________________
oc.m3.d7.ocMA.Kathisma22
Ὅτε τῷ λόγῳ σου, παραστησόμεθα, 
τῷ ἀδεκάστῳ σου, βήματι Κύριε, 
μὴ καταισχύνῃς τοὺς εἰς σέ, Σωτὴρ ἡμῶν πεπιστευκότας· 
πάντες γὰρ ἡμάρτομεν, ἀλλὰ σοῦ οὐκ ἀπέστημεν· 
ὅθεν δυσωποῦμέν σε, ἐν σκηναῖς τῶν δικαίων σου, 
Χριστέ, οὓς προσελάβου ἀνάπαυσον, 
ὡς μόνος ὑπάρχων πολυέλεος.

When You command it, Lord, and we shall all be brought 
to You on Judgment Day and judged impartially, 
O Christ, may we who have believed in You not be put to shame. 
Even though we all have sinned, we have not run away from You. 
Therefore we implore You to grant repose where the saints now dwell 
to those whom You have taken, O Savior, 
for You are singularly merciful.


oc.m3.d7.ocMA.Kathisma23
Ξύλῳ πεπτώκαμεν, πικρῶς εἰς θάνατον, 
ξύλῳ τιμίῳ δέ, πάλιν ἀνέστημεν· 
διὰ Σταυροῦ σου γάρ Σωτήρ, τὸν θάνατον ἐνέκρωσας, 
καὶ τὴν ἀτελεύτητον, ζωὴν πᾶσιν ἐπήγασας, 
ἧς περ καταξίωσον, τοὺς πρὸς σὲ ἐκδημήσαντας, 
οἰκέτας σου πιστοὺς Ἐλεῆμον, 
δωρούμενος αὐτοῖς τὴν Βασιλείαν σου.



Our bitter fall to death involved a tree of old. 
Now we are raised again through Your all-holy tree. 
For You have killed the force of death, O Savior, by the tree of Your cross. 
You became the well of life everlasting for everyone. 
We implore You grant this life to the departed who had faith in You, 
and give to these Your servants Your kingdom, 
O Master, who are singularly merciful.

O Lord, for You have killed the force of death

oc.m3.d7.ocMA.Kathisma24
Τὸν πολυτάραχον, τοῦ βίου κλύδωνα, 
τοὺς ἐκπεράσαντας, τῷ θείῳ νεύματι, 
καὶ μεταστάντας εὐσεβῶς, οἰκέτας σου Πανάμωμε, 
δέξαι καὶ προσάγαγε, τῷ Κριτῇ καὶ Θεῷ ἡμῶν, 
τούτοις ἀπολύτρωσιν, παρασχεῖν ἱκετεύουσα· 
καὶ γὰρ ὡς τοῦ ποιήσαντος Μήτηρ, 
ἔχεις τὸ θέλειν καὶ τὸ δύνασθαι.

O all-immacuate, all-blameless Virgin pure, 
receive your supplicants who have reposed in faith 
and by the will of God have passed away from the turbulent 
storm of life; and usher them to the throne of our Judge and God, 
earnestly entreating Him to release them and pardon them. 
For since you are the Mother of our Maker, 
you are able to accomplish whatever you wish.

oc.m3.d7.ocMA.Lauds4
Ἄνθρωποι, τί μάτην ταραττόμεθα; 
ὁ δρόμος βραχύς ἐστιν, ὃν τρέχομεν, 
καπνὸς ὑπάρχει ὁ βίος, ἀτμὶς καὶ τέφρα καὶ κόνις, 
πρὸς ὀλίγον φαινόμενος, καὶ ταχέως ἀχρειούμενος· 
διὸ Χριστῷ τῷ ἀθανάτῳ Βασιλεῖ βοήσωμεν· 
Τοὺς μεταστάντας ἐξ ἡμῶν ἀνάπαυσον, 
ἔνθα πάντων ἐστίν, εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία ἐν σοί.

O people, why be we troubled about useless things? 
The race we are running is short. 
Our life here is like a puff of smoke, a mist, dust and ashes; 
it is here for a short time, then it quickly loses its purpose. 
So let us pray to Christ our immortal King, 
\"To those who have passed away from us grant repose, 
where glad are all who have their dwelling in You.\"


ocMA.Aposticha1
Δοξάζω τὸν σταυρόν σου τὸν τίμιον, 11
διʼ οὗ ζωὴ δεδώρηται, 8
καὶ τρυφῆς ἡ ἀπόλαυσις, 8
τοῖς ἐν πίστει καὶ πόθῳ, 7
σὲ ὑμνοῦσι μόνε πολυέλεε· 11
διὸ βοῶμέν σοι· Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, 11
τοὺς μεταστάντας ἐξ ἡμῶν ἀνάπαυσον, 12
ἔνθα πάντων ἐστίν, εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία ἐν σοί, 
δοξάζειν σου τὴν Θεότητα.

I glorify Your honorable cross, O Lord, 
and Savior very merciful, for through it everlasting life 
and delight have been given to us all who extol You with faith and love.  
And now we sing to You, O Christ God, and pray 
that You give rest to those who passed away from us, 
and put them in the place, wherein glad are all who have their dwelling in you, 
to glorify Your divinity.


ocMA.Aposticha2
Ὁ μόνος ἐλεήμων καὶ εὔσπλαγχνος, 11
ὁ ἔχων ἀκατάληπτον 8
ἀγαθότητος πέλαγος, 8
ὁ γινώσκων τὴν φύσιν 7
τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἣν ἐδημιούργησας, 11
σὲ ἱκετεύομεν, Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, 11
τοὺς μεταστάντας ἐξ ἡμῶν ἀνάπαυσον, 
ἔνθα πάντων ἐστίν, εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία ἐν σοί, δοξάζειν σου τὴν Θεότητα.


O Lord, supremely caring and merciful, 
You have an inconceivable abundance of benevolence, 
and You know well the nature of humanity, for You created it. 
As we entreat You now, O Christ God, we pray 
that You give rest to those who passed away from us, 
and put them in the place, wherein glad are all who have their dwelling in you, 
to glorify Your divinity.


ocMA.Aposticha3
Ὑπνώσας ἐν τῷ τάφῳ ὡς ἄνθρωπος, 11
δυνάμει ἀηττήτῳ σου, 8
ὡς Θεὸς ἐξανέστησας, 8
τοὺς ἐν τάφοις ὑπνοῦντας, 7
ἀσιγήτως ὕμνον σοι προσφέροντας· 11
διὸ βοῶμέν σοι Χριστὲ ὁ Θεός, 11
τοὺς μεταστάντας ἐξ ἡμῶν ἀνάπαυσον, ἔνθα πάντων ἐστίν, εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία ἐν σοί, 
δοξάζειν σου τὴν Θεότητα.



While You, as man, lay dead in the sepulcher, 
as God, by Your invincible might and power You raised the dead, 
in their graves as if sleeping. And they sang extolling You unceasingly. 
And now we sing to You, O Christ God, and pray 
that You give rest to those who passed away from us, 
and put them in the place, wherein glad are all who have their dwelling in you, 
to glorify Your divinity.


ocMA.AposTheotokion
Λαμπάδα νοητήν σε βαστάζουσαν, 11
τὸ φέγγος τῆς Θεότητος, 8
ὁμιλῆσαν παχύτητι, 8
τῆς ἀνθρώπων οὐσίας 7
Θεοτόκε, πάντες ἐπιστάμεθα· 11
διὸ τὸν σὸν δυσώπησον Υἱὸν καὶ Θεόν, 13
τοὺς μεταστάντας ἐξ ἡμῶν αὐλίζεσθαι, 
ἔνθα πάντων ἐστίν, εὐφραινομένων ἡ κατοικία Ἁγνή, 
δοξάζειν σε τὴν Πανάμωμον.


When God became incarnate and He assumed 
the essence of humanity in your womb, then you held the light 
of the Godhead; and therefore we call you the lampstand metaphorically. 
O Theotokos, earnestly pray your Son and God, 
that He give rest to those who passed away from us, 
and put them in the place, wherein glad are all who have their dwelling in Him, 
to glorify you, all-blameless one.













